In this lecture, I'm going to configure default routes and also load balancing in the lab.
It's the same lab set up as before.
We've got our routers R1 to R5, and our PC1, PC2, and PC3 clients. Right now in the lab,
the routers have all been configured with their IP addresses and we've got static routes between all the
different subnet.
There's just one interface that hasn't been configured yet, which is on fasteEthernet3/0
in R4 we're going to configure that with a public IP address going out to an Internet Service
Provider. So R4 is going to get IP Address 203.0.113.1 and the next hop out to the Internet
is at the Service Provider at 203.0.113.2. So let's configure that
now,
so I'll go onto R4 let's just 'show ip interface brief.'
You see I don't have that internet interface configured yet, so I'll go to global configuration.
And then it was interface fastEthernet3/0 and the IP address is 203.0.113.1,
and we'll use the normal /24 for our lab example
and remember to do a 'no shutdown' on the interface.
Okay, so that is our interface configured.
Let's just check that it's come up.
So we'll do a 'do
show ip interface brief' again and try to spell brief correctly.
And there we can see that fastEthernet3/0 is up/up so
that's good.
Next thing to do is to add a route going out to the Internet.
So obviously, this is going to be for all traffic, everything that isn't for our internal networks.
So the way that you configure a catch-all or a default route is 'ip route'
and then it's for 0.0.0.0 and a subnet mask 0.0.0.0.
This is going to catch everything that does not hit a longer prefix or a more specific match
route.
And the next hop is our Service Provider which was at 203.0.113.2.
And if I now do a 'do show ip route', I can see that thee gateway of last resort has been set to the Service
Provider at 203.0.113.2, and there is our static route it gets an asterisk at the end of the S
to indicate that this is a default static route.
So that is R4 configured for now. Let's also configure default static routes on our other routers
as well.
So if we go back to the topology diagram, R3's next hop
again, it doesn't have direct connectivity to 203.0.113.2 so its route is going
to point at the next hop address of 10.1.1.1. So let's configure that one next, so
that was on R3, I go to global configuration and add a default static route so 0.0.0.0
0.0.0.0 and the next hop there was 10.1.1.1. I'll do a 'do show ip route'
to verify again, I can see that the gateway of last resort is set to the next hop and there is the default
static route. Back to the topology again, next thing we'll do is R2 it's going to have a next hop ofs
10.1.0.0. so back on to the lab again, and onto R2, global config and 'ip route
0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0,'
a next hop of 10.1.0.1. And you have there already, I'll just verify again. I forgot to put
the 'do' in thr front there because I'm not in exec mode, and there is the default static route added fine there as
well, and then we'll do R5 next. Let's just check what its next hop is, so R5 to get out to
the Internet, its next hop 10.1.3.1. So R5 next, 'config t', 'ip route
0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0'
next hop
10.1.3.1, and verify. Okay, so that is, go back to the topology again
R4, R3, R2 and, R5, all configured with a default static route going out to the Internet.
On R1,
I'm going to configure it with two different paths to get out.
I'm going to configure a path via R2, and I'm also going to configure an other route via R5 and then the
router will load balance between them.
So when you want to do load balancing, the route and the prefix have to be exactly the same.
For example 0.0.0.0 and 0.0.0.0, or if I was doing a route to get out to the 10.1 networks behind
R4
I could have 10.1.2.0/24 for both routes,
one going to R2 and one going to R5.
But if one of them was a /16 and one of them was a /24,
that wouldn't work.
Okay, so the
destination you're routing to and the subnet mask have to be exactly the same with your routes
to be able to do equal cost load balancing.
So let's do that on R1,
so I'll go on there, go to global configuration, and I'll do an 'ip route
0.0.0.0'
and a subnet mask of 0.0.0.0 and I'll do the first one going out via R2.
So that was a next hop of 10.0.0.2, and then I'll hit the up arrow to do another route
going via R5 and that was at 10.0.3.2.
And if I now do a 'do show ip route', I should
see both of these showing up in the routing table, so there is my default static route.
And I can see it's going via both of the next hop addresses so the router will laod balance the outbound traffic
via both of these. So
going back to the topology diagram again, that means that traffic from my PCs is going to be load
balanced over the two paths.
However, if we look on R4, I'm not doing load balancing on there yet. So I'll verify that first and then
what I'm going to do is I'm going to do two routes from R4 getting back to the 10.0.1.0 network
and the 10.0.2.0 network.
I'll send one via R3 and I'll send the other one via R5. So on R4,
let's do a 'do show ip route,'
and I was looking for the 10.0.1.0 network where PC1 is, and it's going via 10.1.1.2
which is on R3 and 10.0.2.0,
I've also got a single route for that going via R3 as well.
So let's add a couple of routes here, so ip route to 10.0.1.0 255.255.255.0 and I'll send
this via R5 at 10.1.3.2, and I'll do the same
also for the 10.0.2.0 network and if I do a 'do show ip route' now, I'll see that I'm load balancing
on those 10.0.1.0 and 10.0.2.0 networks.
So I go back to the topology diagram, traffic going out to the Internet from PC1 and PC2 should be
load balanced over the top and the bottom path.
So let's go back to the command line to verify that.
I'll go on to PC1,
now I don't actually have Internet connectivity in my lab here, so I'm not going to be able to ping
an address on the outside but I'll be able to verify the path as far as R4 and I should see half
of it going over the top path and half of it going over the bottom path.
So let's verify that.
From PC1, I'll do a trace, I'll just make up a public IP address, so let's do a trace to
50.50.50.50, and I see that that is going via 10.0.3.2 which is R5
on the bottom path.
So I'll break out of that and I should see the other half of my traffic going via R2 which is at
10.0.0.2.
But let me tell you the way that the load balancing algorithm works as well.
If I keep doing a trace between the same source and destination, you'll see that it's always going to take
the same path.
So from PC1 to 50.50.50.50,
it's always going via R5. The way that the load balancing algorithm works is it's based on a hash
between the two different hosts. So traffic from one host to another host between the same two IP addresses of
the same port is always going to go over the same path.
The reason for this is that it's not going to do round robin load balancing for the same flow.
So say that my PC1 host was accessing a web server at 50.50.50.50.
I don't want that traffic for the same flow to be going over two different paths because it could cause the packets
to arrive out of order and that could cause problems for my application.
So the same flow will always go over the same path, but if I do it trace to a different IP address,
there's a 50/50 chance
it will either go over the same path or a different one. So I'll just go up one IP address and now I can see
that when I'm going to a different IP address of 50.50.50.51 it is going over the top path,
which is via router R2. Okay, so that's how to configure our static default routes and also
how our load balancing works. See you in the next section.